Changelog (#4875)
ClanGenOfficial/clangen: docs/blog/posts/v0-13-0.md

---
title: Furriends and Foes - v0.13.0
draft: true
date: 2026-05-08
categories:
  - Changelog
  - Major Release
slug: v0.13.0
---

![The update cover art. Features the update title: Furriends and Foes, as well as art of a queen nursing three newborns while her other 3 adolescent children watch. One of the adolescent cats is staring upwards at a ghostly observer.](../assets/0_13_changelog/furriends_and_foes.png)

!!! tip "A big world..."

>     _"It's a big world out there," the queen tells her new, squirming kits softly. "It's a world of sounds and sights, full of furriends and foes alike." Her kits already know the Clan, recognising the scents of those who have visited her to greet them._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    _"It's a big world out there," the queen tells her new, squirming kits softly. "A world of sounds and sights, full of furriends and foes alike." Her kits already know the Clan, recognizing the scents of those who have visited her to greet them._
```
gynn thought he could smuggle in a british spelling, but he was wrong

> Such is life. New relationships, new kits, new adolescents. New sounds, new sights, new adventures... so many new things packed into one update. Whilst our queen gets back to tidying her kits' fur, let's take a more in-depth look at the changes in ClanGen 0.13.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such is life. New relationships, new kits, new adolescents. New sounds, new sights, new adventures... So many new things packed into one update. Whilst our queen gets some much-deserved rest, let's take a more in-depth look at the changes in ClanGen 0.13.0.
```
I know this doesn't matter at all lol I just think it's a little more obvious than tidying up the kits

<!-- more -->

## **FEATURES**

### New Navigation

![A screenshot of the Camp screen featuring the new navigation UI.](../assets/0_13_changelog/new_nav_and_bridge.png)
///caption
A look at our new navigation and a new camp!
///

> For a long time, ClanGen has been in need of some updated navigation UI! As we've added more and more features, they've mostly been tacked onto what already existed. This gets messy after a while and eventually the navigation became subpar both for players *and* for devs attempting to add to it. Our goal with this is to bring somewhat-hidden features to the surface and better consolidate information to maximize screen space. We hope this update helps you enjoy the game even more!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a long time, ClanGen has been in need of some updated navigation UI! As we've added more and more features, they've mostly been tacked onto what already existed. Eventually the navigation became subpar both for players *and* for devs attempting to add to it. Our goal is to bring somewhat-hidden features to the surface and better consolidate information to maximize screen space. We hope this update helps you enjoy the game even more!
```

  - The top menu bar has been changed to include the Dens dropdown and an entirely new menu dropdown: Supplies.  
  - Supplies allows you to view two new windows: Freshkill and Herbs.

>     - The Freshkill management window is taking on the old functionality of the Clearing. Here you can see all the hungry cats in the Clan, select and feed specific cats (or feed all cats at once!), and easily adjust the current Tactic selections (which have also gotten an upgrade.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The Freshkill management window has the old functionality of the Clearing. You can see all the hungry cats in the Clan, select and feed specific cats (or feed all cats at once!), and easily change Tactics (which have also gotten an upgrade.)
```

>     - The Herb window is more bare bones, but will receive later upgrades. For now, it's just an easy way to access the Medicine Den log so that you can quickly see how the herb supply has changed.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The Herb window is more bare-bones but will receive later upgrades. For now, it's just an easy way to access the Medicine Den log and see how the herb supply has changed.  
```

>   - The Camp button has been removed. But fear not! The Camp screen is still here. It's now being treated as the "default" screen. You'll notice a new "Back" button on some screens, clicking this will take you back to the Camp! You can also click on the menu header that displays the Clan name to return to the Camp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The Camp button has been removed. But fear not! The Camp screen is still here as the "default" screen. You'll notice a new "Back" button on some screens: clicking this will take you back to the Camp! You can also click on the Clan name menu header to return to the Camp.
```

  - The moon-n-seasons indicator has been greatly changed. It no longer hangs out as a widget on the left side of the screen. Instead, we've integrated it into the top menu as a diegetic element. The vine changes color and design with the season, and the moon icon can be hovered over to see the moon count. This moon icon also changes with each timeskip!  
  - The Events page now features a Save Clan button right next to Timeskip.

>   - But wait! What about the Clearing? The Clearing is now where you mediate between your cats! No more must you go to a mediator's profile first in order to access this screen. Instead, make those cats hash out their issues in the middle of the camp for max drama.

Reviewer: lmfao. love this

Author: hehe >:)

  - All cat profiles now feature a den button under the sprite, if that cat has a rank with a corresponding den.

### Relationships System Rework

![A screenshot of the relationships page with improved graphics.](../assets/0_13_changelog/new_relationships.png)
///caption
A view of the relationship screen with its updated bar displays.
///

Relationships got a facelift! We wanted to improve the existing system to create space for more complexities in relationships, especially on the negative side of them.

  - Relationships are now defined by 5 values: Like, Respect, Trust, Comfort, and Romance.
  - Each value has corresponding tiers: Extreme Neg, Mid Neg, Low Neg, Neutral, Low Pos, Mid Pos, and Extreme Pos. Romance is an exception and only has positive tiers.  

>   - Each value tier has a unique name that will be displayed. For example, the Mid Neg tier for Comfort will display as "fears" while the Mid Neg tier for Respect will display as "envies".

Reviewer: To better showcase the diversity, maybe one of the examples should be the name of a positive tier.

Author: Good point

So how will this be reflected in your current save files? Some relationships might seem to shift a bit! Unfortunately this is unavoidable considering how big of a change this is from the old system. However, we've done our best to try and convert old relationship saves as faithfully as possible.

Additionally:

  - Extended family will now "react" to new litters and have a starting relationship with the new kittens. This reaction will be based on the relative's current relationship with the parents of the kittens. If a cousin really dislikes the parents, they'll likely dislike the kittens as well! This reaction receives a relationship log message.
    - There's a bit of random variability here, so a relative may not view every kitten in a litter the same way. Grandma probably has a favorite grandchild... no matter what she might tell you.
    - Relatives not currently present in the Clan won't have a reaction, as they have no idea the kittens exist!

### Expanded Audio System
Our audio system was recoded from the ground up to allow us more freedom! This was a massive headache, but well worth it.

>   - Unique ambient noise tracks added for all biomes. Certain camps and seasons have unique sound bites that will play at random intervals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Unique ambient noise tracks were added for all biomes. Certain camps and seasons have unique sound bites that will play at random intervals.
```
Just making sure the syntax is uniform across all bulletpoints

>   - 6 new music tracks added. These will play at random intervals during the game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - 6 new music tracks were added. These will play at random intervals during the game.
```

  - Cats now receive special history text when they die relating to which afterlife they were sent to. With different text depending on if they were accepted to the afterlife without debate, accepted with some controversy, or are kits.
  - Cats cannot yet be rejected from an afterlife, but we're setting up for that sort of feature!
  - Afterlives now have temperaments based on the cats they contain. Only guides, leaders, deputies, and medicine cats can affect this temperament.  This temper is displayed on their list page.

### Multiple Accessories

![multi_accessory.png](../assets/0_13_changelog/multi_accessory.png)
///caption
This cat is wearing both a collar and gorse.
///

  - Cats can now wear up to 3 different accessories at once!
  - Accessories have been divided up into categories based on the body parts that they cover: Head, Collar, Body, and Tail. Cats can gain accessories that are part of a category that they don't yet have an accessory for.
  - Each subsequent accessory reduces their chances of getting another accessory

### Status Rework

> The status system has been entirely reworked! What's the "status system"? For a long time, a cat's "status" was a single string (code-talk for a length of text) denoting their rank or place in the world. A loner's rank was "loner", a warrior's rank was "warrior". This worked well for a long time! However, as ClanGen grew more complex it began to demand more information than a single string could provide. We made stopgap measures that allowed us to do more, but also tangled the code more. We realized that if we ever wanted to handle some of the complexities we *want* to handle, then we needed to change how status worked. The new system handles things in a more robust manner, allowing us to store significantly more information rather than just a single string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The status system has been entirely reworked!  For a long time, a cat's "status" was a single string (code-talk for a length of text) denoting their rank or place in the world. A loner's rank was "loner", a warrior's rank was "warrior". This worked well for a long time! However, as ClanGen grew more complex it began to demand more information than a single string could provide. Our stopgap measures allowed us to do more but also further tangled the code. To handle some of the complexities we *want* to handle, we needed to change how status worked. The new, more robust system allows us to store significantly more information rather than just a single string.
```
Just trying to streamline some of this for readability

![new_events.png](../assets/0_13_changelog/new_events.png)
/// caption
Chasing doesn't seem to get along with these apprentices...
///

  - New war events including things like kit-napping, rescues, loners sharing resources, and more!
  - New leader's den outcomes for bloodthirsty, childish, and cold cats. New failures added involving outsiders.
  - New warrior ceremonies
  - New death reactions for mates, children, specific traits, and certain types of relationships.
  - New relationship events featuring child/parent relationships, some jealous romance, and more!
  - Added more varied breakup events. There are now many different types of breakups, such as "had_fight" or "decided_to_be_friends", all with unique text events. Each breakup type will affect relationships between the two cats in a different way.
  - Added new "makeup" events for cats who are ex-mates but decide to become mates once again! This even includes special events for rejection of an ex-mate.
  - New birth events that skew towards a more negative light.
  - Added a new type of event called "hidden_murder_reveal". Some murders might appear to be an innocent accident! Until something more is revealed...

>   - Added a new type of event called "failed_murder". Some would-be murderers might have their plans foiled... perhaps they'll succeed next time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Added a new type of event called "failed_murder". Some would-be murderers might have their plans foiled... Perhaps they'll succeed next time.
```

  - The Event display now features pagination in addition to the scrollbar. This gets rid of the issue large Clans would experience where the number of events make scrolling entirely impossible.
  - General game settings can now be accessed through the Clan Settings screen rather than requiring you to return to the Main Menu entirely.
  - Cyrillic added to the ClanGen font
  - Credits screen got a facelift
  - Cat list now displays the temperament of the group being viewed.
  - Improvements to the look and behavior of pop-up windows.

### Misc
  - Dead cats can now be sent to the Unknown Residence by players.
  - The game no longer has to close when you switch Clans! Yay!!
  - You can now have multiple save files with the same Clan name! Clans are now identified by the code via a unique ID rather than their Clan name.
  - The histories of murderers and their victims will now note if anyone in the Clan is aware of the truth.
  - Leader death history is now displayed more clearly and cleanly.
  - Unmated affairs (co-parenting) and mated affairs (cheating) can now be toggled individually.
  - Moon events will repeat less often.
  - Assorted performance improvements

>   - Loner names have been split into three categories: Loner, Silly, Human. Each category has it's own chance of being chosen from depending on what sort of outsider is being named (for example, a kittypet will be more likely to take a silly or human name while a rogue will be more likely to take a loner name or a name from the list of Clan prefixes.)  The intention is to better control the assignment of names that feel appropriate to the cats they're being given to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Loner names have been split into three categories: Loner, Silly, Human. The type of outsider will determine which category their name comes from (for example, a kittypet will be more likely to take a silly or human name while a rogue will be more likely to take a loner name or a name from the list of Clan prefixes.)  The intention is to better control the assignment of names that feel appropriate to the cats they're being given to.
```

***
## **BALANCING**

### Wars
  - Events with non-warring Clan are now available even while at war
  - Death and injury chances greatly increased while at war and in a relation decrease war state, especially for leaders
  - Relations threshold for war ending was increased. Some Clan temperaments change how high relations needs to get in order for war to end.
  - Decreased the relation bonus applied when wars end.

>   - Bias towards relation increasing war events was removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Bias towards relation-increasing war events was removed.
```

  - First moon of a war is now always a relation decrease state, giving it a higher chance of injury/death
  - Chances of war events reduced on moons where the war state is neutral or relation increase.

### Murder
  - Adjusted a cat's chance to murder to be more greatly influenced by personality and current relationship to their target. The presence of "high negative" relationship logs no longer has such a large impact.
  - Cats will now always target the cat that they have the worst relationship towards, rather than randomly choosing from all cats they have any negativity towards.
  - Ambitious deputies gain a further murder chance buff when targeting their leader

### Misc
  - Adjusted the effects of lack-of-treatment on cats with permanent conditions
  - Adjusted the calculation for determining if herb supply is adequate for Clan size to be more forgiving.

>   - Altered medicine cat apprentice odds to allow more than one medicine cat apprentice at once, boost odds of "logical" kits being selected, and lower odds of "unsuitable" kits being selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Altered medicine cat apprentice odds to allow more than one medicine cat apprentice at once, boost odds of "suitable" kits being selected, and lower odds of "unsuitable" kits being selected.
```
I think "logical" is a confusing word here since that's also a Clan temperament lol
